---
layout: post
title: Google Summer of Code - The Start
# bigimg: /img/gsoc-logo.png
tags: [gsoc, data-science, machine-learning]
---

Welcome to the first edition of my weekly blogs for Google Summer of Code 2017! I'll be working with the [Shogun](http://shogun.ml) team on a data project for patient monitoring and decision support using health data. I'm really excited about this project because machine learning is being applied in the healthcare domain which has important repercussions on society. While existing methods have been promising, I still believe that the healthcare sector is lacking behind in terms of use of technology in application, and that artificial intelligence should be used more in practice today to improve the delivery, efficiency and quality of healthcare.

For the first week, I focused on building simple models for predicting mortality and the hospital length of stay. A python notebook of my work can be found [here](https://github.com/olinguyen/gsoc2017-shogun-dataproject/).

## Intro

Everyday, the healthcare industry creates large amounts of patient and clinical data and stores them in electronic health records. Most of this data has previously been inaccessible, in part due to patient privacy concerns, which poses a challenge to researchers working on the analysis of health records.

However, initatives like the Medical Information Mart For Intensive Care (MIMIC) database project have allowed for everyone to use and experiment with health data. In particular, the [MIMIC database](https://mimic.physionet.org/
) is a critical care database made freely available for researchers around the world to develop and evaluate intensive care unit (ICU) patient monitoring and decision support systems that will improve the efficiency, accuracy and timeliness of clinical decision-making in critical care. The data mainly includes demographic, administrative, clinical data and much more from over 45,000 critical care patients.

## Objective

Using the MIMIC database, I focused on these 2 prediction tasks:

1. Mortality prediction
2. Hospital length of stay  

More specifically, I'm interested in accomplishing the following:

1. Extract predictor variables from the MIMIC database
2. Build machine learning models for the predictions tasks
3. Improve performance results using hyper-parameter tuning, or ensemble methods for tree classifiers

## Data Preparation

Because MIMIC is an ICU database, the focus will be on patients admitted to and discharged from the ICU. Patients admitted to the ICU generally suffer from severe and life-threatening illnesses and injuries which require constant, close monitoring and support. Being able to make good decisions during this time period is therefore crucial. For that reason, I selected and grouped the data points based off the ICU stay rather than the individual patient to develop a model specifically for ICU patient monitoring and decision-making.

The selection criteria is described below along with a short explanation. The following points were excluded from the dataset:

* Patients aged less than 16 years old
    * This also removed neonates and children, which likely have different predictors than adults
* Second admissions of patients
    * Simplifies analysis which assumes independent observations
    * We avoid taking into account that ICU stays are highly correlated
* Length of stay less than 2 days
    * Helps remove false positives that we're placed in ICU for precautionary purposes
* Exclude patients based on hospital services
    * Makes a more homogenous group of patients since we remove patients undergoing surgery

From a total of 61,534 unique ICU stay observations, the summary of the exclusions is as follows:

| Exclusion      | # ICU stays    |
|----------------|----------------|
| Length of stay | 29211 (47.47%) |
| Age            | 8109 (13.18%)  |
| First stay     | 15058 (24.47%) |
| Surgical       | 18225 (29.52%) |
| Total          | 48929 (79.52%) |

After the exclusions, up to 48929 observations (almost 80% of samples), which is quite significant. The remaining data consists of a little over 20,000 patients that are kept for data analysis.

## Feature selection

The MIMIC database holds a lot of information about the patient, with each hospitalization having on average over 230 different types of measurements and over 5700 charted observations for a single patient. For a basic proof of concept, I simply used the general characteristics of the patient like the demographic information, and a few vital sign readings. The vital signs measurements were made using data from a single time interval which is the entire period of hospital admission.

* Age at the first ICU entry
* Gender
* First care unit
* Max & min heart rate
* Max & min respiratory rate
* Max & min blood pressure

## Basic models

For mortality prediction, which is a binary classification problem, I first experimented with a simple linear support vector machine (SVM) whereas for hospital length of stay, I used least squares regression and linear ridge regression. For the evaluation of my models, I used stratified 10-fold and averaged out the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (auROC) over all the folds. Stratified cross-validation is used because it gives a good estimate for the performance of our model, as the data is divided into k equally sized folds in such a way that labels in each partition are roughly the same. Since the number of patients who actually died is low, accuracy is not a good metric for this problem. If our classifier would never make a prediction e.g. predicting 0 for every sample, the model would still yield a high accuracy. Instead, auROC is a better fit because it looks at the true positive rate and the false positive rate.

## Preliminary Results

My linear SVM model for mortality prediction produced a mean auROC of 77.195%. For the prediction of hospital length of stay, I obtained a mean squared error of 76.58 for both least square regression and linear ridge regression.
