---
layout: post
title: Google Summer of Code - Week 7
# bigimg: /img/gsoc-logo.png
tags: [gsoc, data-science, machine-learning]
---

This week, I worked on two notebooks that will eventually be on Shogun's [showroom](shogun.ml/showroom) to showcase my data project using the MIMIC database. In the [first notebook](https://github.com/olinguyen/gsoc2017-shogun-dataproject/blob/master/Exploring%20MIMIC.ipynb), I focused on introducing the MIMIC database. The tutorial first explains what MIMIC is and shows how to use SQL queries to extract different types of data from the PostgreSQL database. Additionally, I demonstrate how to construct descriptive statistics of the data and build various visualizations to explore the database. What I wanted users to get from this is to be able to get up and running with the MIMIC database and show them how to use it.

In the [second notebook](https://github.com/olinguyen/gsoc2017-shogun-dataproject/blob/master/Shogun%20Showroom.ipynb), the focus is on applying machine learning algorithms on the MIMIC database for mortality prediction and predicting the patient hospital length of stay. The methods and techniques used in the first part of my project, which I have documented in my weekly blogs, are compressed into a single notebook. I figured separating my work into these two notebooks was the best way to get someone started using Shogun with MIMIC for data analysis since it avoids having to navigate multiple files.

## Upcoming patches to Shogun

When evaluating classifiers for mortality prediction, the auROC metric requires probability scores in order to compute the total score. In the current Shogun implementation, Random Forest, KNN and decision trees only output binary labels. I'm currently in the process of incorporating this in the toolbox so that probabilistic predictions would be outputted, and eventually this would allow me to evaluate the auROC performance of the three classifiers for mortality prediction.

I also compiled a list of suggestions and improvements for Shogun which can be found [here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1T44zJoD256Rx00x0trweM_aPDbERFQ-AwKLYCXXg5uA/edit?usp=sharing). I'll be updating these more thoreoughly in the coming week and writing proper issues on Github.

## Neural networks

I also started preliminary work building a simple classifier using Shogun's neural network capabilities which can be found in the following [notebook](https://github.com/olinguyen/gsoc2017-shogun-dataproject/blob/master/Neural%20Networks.ipynb). The neural network consisted of 10 hidden layers with [ReLU](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rectifier_(neural_networks)
) activation units with 2 softmax layers at the end for the 2 classes for mortality prediction. The auROC computed was found to be ~0.13 which are very poor results. I'll have to investigate further to see what explains this.
